README.md, before:

# Library Management System

A library management system with book and user tracking, CSV import/export, and SQLite database persistence.

## Features

- Book Management: Add, search, reserve, and return books
- User Management: Track library users with contact information
- Database: SQLite 
- CSV Import: Load books from CSV files
- Comprehensive unit tests with pytest
- CI/CD: GitHub Actions workflow for automated testing



## Usage

### Command-Line Interface

After installation, you can use the `library` command:

```bash
# Initialize a database
library init-db library.db

# Load books from CSV
library load-csv books.csv --db library.db

# List all books
library list-books --db library.db

# List only available books
library list-books --available --db library.db

# Reserve a book
library reserve "The Grapes of Wrath" --db library.db

# Return a book
library return "The Grapes of Wrath" --db library.db

# Add a user
library add-user --first "My" --last "Name" --email "my@example.com" --db library.db

# List users
library list-users --db library.db
```

### Python API

```python
from library_management import LibrarySystem, Book, User, load_books_from_csv

library = LibrarySystem()

# With database
library = LibrarySystem(db_path="library.db")

# Add a book
book = Book(
    book_id=1,
    title="The Grapes of Wrath",
    author="John Steinbeck",
    genre="Fiction",
    average_rating=4.5,
    isbn="978-0140042399",
    available=True
)
library.add_book(book)

# Add a user
user = User(
    first_name="My",
    last_name="Name",
    email="my@example.com"
)
library.add_user(user)

# Load books from CSV
books = load_books_from_csv("books.csv")
for book in books:
    library.add_book(book)

# Find and reserve a book
book = library.find_book_by_title("The Grapes of Wrath")
if book and book.available:
    book.reserve()
    library.update_book(book)

# List books
for book in library.list_books():
    print(book)
```

## CSV Format

The CSV loader is flexible and supports various column names. Required columns:
- `title`
- `author`

Optional columns:
- `book_id`
- `genre`
- `average_rating`
- `isbn` or `ISBN`
- `language_code`
- `rating_count`
- `available` (true/false, yes/no, 1/0)

Example CSV:
```csv
title,author,genre,available
The Grapes of Wrath,John Steinbeck,Fiction,true
The Poppy War,R.F. Kuang,Fantasy,true
```

## Database Schema

The SQLite database includes three tables:

1. **books**: Stores book information
2. **users**: Stores user information
3. **borrowings**: Tracks book borrowings and returns

## Development

### Running Tests

```bash
# Run all tests
pytest

# Run with coverage
pytest --cov=library_management --cov-report=html

# Run specific test file
pytest tests/test_models.py
```

### Code Formatting

```bash
# Format code with black
black library_management tests

# Check with ruff
ruff check library_management tests

# Type checking with mypy
mypy library_management
```

### Installing Dev Dependencies

```bash
pip install -e ".[dev]"
```

## Project Structure

```
library-management/
├── library_management/     
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── models.py           # Book and User models
│   ├── library.py          # LibrarySystem class
│   ├── database.py         # SQLite db layer
│   ├── data_loader.py      # CSV loading 
│   └── cli.py              # Typer CLI interface
├── tests/                  # Unit tests
│   ├── test_models.py
│   ├── test_library.py
│   ├── test_database.py
│   └── test_data_loader.py
├── scripts/               
│   └── generate_book_data.py
├── pyproject.toml          # project config
├── requirements.txt        # prod dependencies
├── requirements-dev.txt    # dev dependencies
└── README.md
```

## CI/CD

The project includes GitHub Actions workflows that:
- Run tests on multiple Python versions (3.8-3.12)
- Run tests on multiple operating systems (Linux, macOS, Windows)
- Check code formatting and linting
- Generate coverage reports

Commit message:

Fix Python 3.8 compatibility: remove pandas and matplotlib from core dependencies
- Remove pandas and matplotlib from core dependencies (not used in package)
- Add optional analysis dependency group for data analysis tools
- Create requirements-analysis.txt for analysis/visualization work
- Fixes CI failure on Python 3.8 (pandas 2.2+ requires Python 3.9+)

README.md, after:

# Library Management System

A library management system with book and user tracking, CSV import/export, and SQLite database persistence.

## Features

- Book Management: Add, search, reserve, and return books
- User Management: Track library users with contact information
- Database: SQLite 
- CSV Import: Load books from CSV files
- Comprehensive unit tests with pytest
- CI/CD: GitHub Actions workflow for automated testing



## Usage

### Command-Line Interface

After installation, you can use the `library` command:

```bash
# Initialize a database
library init-db library.db

# Load books from CSV
library load-csv books.csv --db library.db

# List all books
library list-books --db library.db

# List only available books
library list-books --available --db library.db

# Reserve a book
library reserve "The Grapes of Wrath" --db library.db

# Return a book
library return "The Grapes of Wrath" --db library.db

# Add a user
library add-user --first "My" --last "Name" --email "my@example.com" --db library.db

# List users
library list-users --db library.db
```

### Python API

```python
from library_management import LibrarySystem, Book, User, load_books_from_csv

library = LibrarySystem()

# With database
library = LibrarySystem(db_path="library.db")

# Add a book
book = Book(
    book_id=1,
    title="The Grapes of Wrath",
    author="John Steinbeck",
    genre="Fiction",
    average_rating=4.5,
    isbn="978-0140042399",
    available=True
)
library.add_book(book)

# Add a user
user = User(
    first_name="My",
    last_name="Name",
    email="my@example.com"
)
library.add_user(user)

# Load books from CSV
books = load_books_from_csv("books.csv")
for book in books:
    library.add_book(book)

# Find and reserve a book
book = library.find_book_by_title("The Grapes of Wrath")
if book and book.available:
    book.reserve()
    library.update_book(book)

# List books
for book in library.list_books():
    print(book)
```

## CSV Format

The CSV loader is flexible and supports various column names. Required columns:
- `title`
- `author`

Optional columns:
- `book_id`
- `genre`
- `average_rating`
- `isbn` or `ISBN`
- `language_code`
- `rating_count`
- `available` (true/false, yes/no, 1/0)

Example CSV:
```csv
title,author,genre,available
The Grapes of Wrath,John Steinbeck,Fiction,true
The Poppy War,R.F. Kuang,Fantasy,true
```

## Database Schema

The SQLite database includes three tables:

1. **books**: Stores book information
2. **users**: Stores user information
3. **borrowings**: Tracks book borrowings and returns

## Development

### Running Tests

```bash
# Run all tests
pytest

# Run with coverage
pytest --cov=library_management --cov-report=html

# Run specific test file
pytest tests/test_models.py
```

### Code Formatting

```bash
# Format code with black
black library_management tests

# Check with ruff
ruff check library_management tests

# Type checking with mypy
mypy library_management
```

### Installing Dev Dependencies

```bash
pip install -e ".[dev]"
```

### Optional Analysis Dependencies

For data analysis and visualization (pandas, matplotlib):

```bash
pip install -e ".[analysis]"
# or
pip install -r requirements-analysis.txt
```

## Project Structure

```
library-management/
├── library_management/     
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── models.py           # Book and User models
│   ├── library.py          # LibrarySystem class
│   ├── database.py         # SQLite db layer
│   ├── data_loader.py      # CSV loading 
│   └── cli.py              # Typer CLI interface
├── tests/                  # Unit tests
│   ├── test_models.py
│   ├── test_library.py
│   ├── test_database.py
│   └── test_data_loader.py
├── scripts/               
│   └── generate_book_data.py
├── pyproject.toml          # project config
├── requirements.txt        # prod dependencies
├── requirements-dev.txt    # dev dependencies
└── README.md
```

## CI/CD

The project includes GitHub Actions workflows that:
- Run tests on multiple Python versions (3.8-3.12)
- Run tests on multiple operating systems (Linux, macOS, Windows)
- Check code formatting and linting
- Generate coverage reports
